Software:- Set or group of multiple programs running together.
Software Program/Program:- Set of logical instructions.

So a Software company focuses on creating, managing, delivering,
maintaing softwares.

Types of IT companies in Market:-

1. Product Based IT companies:-
	These companies create there own software products.
	eg:- Oracle, IBM, CISCO, MICROSOFT....
	
	
2. Service Based IT companies:-
	These companies provide there services to other companies.
	Eg:- infosys, accenture, techm, capgemini......
	
SDLC:- Software Development Lifecycle.
This is nothing but a process which is followed in a company/project to develop
and deliver a software app/software product asap.

Stages/Phases of SDLC:-

1. Requirement Phase:- (Planning Phase)
BA collect the requirements from the customer/client as per there
needs and create a proper requirement documentation
then this requirement is shared within the internal project team.

BA:- Business Analyst  --- a person who interacts with the client.

2. Analysis Phase:-(Planning Phase)
 Once the requirment is gathered, the next step is to analyse the
 customer requirement within the project team, and create a internal documentation.
 
3. Design Phase:-(Planning Phase)
a. High Level Design:- High level software Architechture
b. Low Level Design:- in detail software design, means we will 
design minute things such as which technology should we implement,
which features should we implement etc etc

4. Development Phase:- Actual development/coding is started in this phase.
in this phase the code which is developed is called as Source Code.

5. Testing Phase:- After development is done, a through testing
is done. multiple testing teams work together and test our created software.
there are multiple types of testing which is done.

6. Deployment Phase:- 
	Here the created software is given/delivered to the customer.
	software is deployed in the customer env.

7. Maintenance Phase:- 
	Incase there is any issue related to software delivered to our client,
	and our client raises any issue, in this phase we solve the clients problem